## Introduction

A fundamental problem in distributed computing and multi-agent systems is to achieve overall system reliability in the presence of a number of faulty processes.
This often requires coordinating processes to reach consensus, or agree on some data value that is needed during computation.
Example applications of consensus include agreeing on what transactions to commit to a database in which order, state machine replication, and atomic broadcasts.
Real-world applications often requiring consensus include cloud computing, clock synchronization, PageRank, opinion formation, smart power grids, state estimation, control of UAVs (and multiple robots/agents in general), load balancing, blockchain, and others.

## Problem description

The consensus problem requires agreement among a number of processes (or agents) for a single data value.
Some of the processes (agents) may fail or be unreliable in other ways, so consensus protocols must be fault tolerant or resilient.
The processes must somehow put forth their candidate values, communicate with one another, and agree on a single consensus value.

The consensus problem is a fundamental problem in control of multi-agent systems.
One approach to generating consensus is for all processes (agents) to agree on a majority value.
In this context, a majority requires at least one more than half of available votes (where each process is given a vote).
However, one or more faulty processes may skew the resultant outcome such that consensus may not be reached or reached incorrectly.

Protocols that solve consensus problems are designed to deal with limited numbers of faulty processes.
These protocols must satisfy a number of requirements to be useful. For instance, a trivial protocol could have all processes output binary value 1.
This is not useful and thus the requirement is modified such that the output must somehow depend on the input. That is, the output value of a consensus protocol must be the input value of some process.
Another requirement is that a process may decide upon an output value only once and this decision is irrevocable. A process is called correct in an execution if it does not experience a failure.
A consensus protocol tolerating halting failures must satisfy the following properties.

- **Termination**
  Eventually, every correct process decides some value.
- **Integrity**
  If all the correct processes proposed the same value v, then any correct process must decide v.
- **Agreement**
  Every correct process must agree on the same value.

Variations on the definition of integrity may be appropriate, according to the application.
For example, a weaker type of integrity would be for the decision value to equal a value that some correct process proposed – not necessarily all of them.
The Integrity condition is also known as validity in the literature.

A protocol that can correctly guarantee consensus amongst n processes of which at most t fail is said to be t-resilient.

In evaluating the performance of consensus protocols two factors of interest are running time and message complexity.
Running time is given in Big O notation in the number of rounds of message exchange as a function of some input parameters (typically the number of processes and/or the size of the input domain).
Message complexity refers to the amount of message traffic that is generated by the protocol.
Other factors may include memory usage and the size of messages.

## Models of computation

Varying models of computation may define a "consensus problem". Some models may deal with fully connected graphs, while others may deal with rings and trees.
In some models message authentication is allowed, whereas in others processes are completely anonymous. Shared memory models in which processes communicate by accessing objects in shared memory are also an important area of research.

### Communication channels with direct or transferable authentication

In most models of communication protocol participants communicate through authenticated channels.
This means that messages are not anonymous, and receivers know the source of every message they receive.
Some models assume a stronger, transferable form of authentication, where each message is signed by the sender, so that a receiver knows not just the immediate source of every message, but the participant that initially created the message.
This stronger type of authentication is achieved by digital signatures, and when this stronger form of authentication is available, protocols can tolerate a larger number of faults.

The two different authentication models are often called oral communication and written communication models.
In an oral communication model, the immediate source of information is known, whereas in stronger, written communication models, every step along the receiver learns not just the immediate source of the message, but the communication history of the message.

### Inputs and outputs of consensus

In the most traditional single-value consensus protocols such as Paxos, cooperating nodes agree on a single value such as an integer, which may be of variable size so as to encode useful metadata such as a transaction committed to a database.

A special case of the single-value consensus problem, called binary consensus, restricts the input, and hence the output domain, to a single binary digit {0,1}.
While not highly useful by themselves, binary consensus protocols are often useful as building blocks in more general consensus protocols, especially for asynchronous consensus.

In multi-valued consensus protocols such as Multi-Paxos and Raft, the goal is to agree on not just a single value but a series of values over time, forming a progressively-growing history.
While multi-valued consensus may be achieved naively by running multiple iterations of a single-valued consensus protocol in succession, many optimizations and other considerations such as reconfiguration support can make multi-valued consensus protocols more efficient in practice.

## Crash and Byzantine failures

There are two types of failures a process may undergo, a crash failure or a Byzantine failure.
A crash failure occurs when a process abruptly stops and does not resume.
Byzantine failures are failures in which absolutely no conditions are imposed.
For example, they may occur as a result of the malicious actions of an adversary.
A process that experiences a Byzantine failure may send contradictory or conflicting data to other processes, or it may sleep and then resume activity after a lengthy delay.
Of the two types of failures, Byzantine failures are far more disruptive.

Thus, a consensus protocol tolerating Byzantine failures must be resilient to every possible error that can occur.

A stronger version of consensus tolerating Byzantine failures is given by strengthening the Integrity constraint:

**Integrity**
If a correct process decides v, then v must have been proposed by some correct process.

### Asynchronous and synchronous systems

The consensus problem may be considered in the case of asynchronous or synchronous systems.
While real world communications are often inherently asynchronous, it is more practical and often easier to model synchronous systems, given that asynchronous systems naturally involve more issues than synchronous ones.

In synchronous systems, it is assumed that all communications proceed in rounds. In one round, a process may send all the messages it requires, while receiving all messages from other processes.
In this manner, no message from one round may influence any messages sent within the same round.

### The FLP impossibility result for asynchronous deterministic consensus

In a fully asynchronous message-passing distributed system, in which at least one process may have a crash failure, it has been proven in the famous FLP impossibility result that a deterministic algorithm for achieving consensus is impossible.
This impossibility result derives from worst-case scheduling scenarios, which are unlikely to occur in practice except in adversarial situations such as an intelligent denial-of-service attacker in the network.
In most normal situations, process scheduling has a degree of natural randomness.

In an asynchronous model, some forms of failures can be handled by a synchronous consensus protocol.
For instance, the loss of a communication link may be modeled as a process which has suffered a Byzantine failure.

Randomized consensus algorithms can circumvent the FLP impossibility result by achieving both safety and liveness with overwhelming probability,
even under worst-case scheduling scenarios such as an intelligent denial-of-service attacker in the network.

### Permissioned versus permissionless consensus

Consensus algorithms traditionally assume that the set of participating nodes is fixed and given at the outset:
that is, that some prior (manual or automatic) configuration process has permissioned a particular known group of participants who can authenticate each other as members of the group.
In the absence of such a well-defined, closed group with authenticated members, a Sybil attack against an open consensus group can defeat even a Byzantine consensus algorithm,
simply by creating enough virtual participants to overwhelm the fault tolerance threshold.

A permissionless consensus protocol, in contrast, allows anyone in the network to join dynamically and participate without prior permission,
but instead imposes a different form of artificial cost or barrier to entry to mitigate the Sybil attack threat.
Bitcoin introduced the first permissionless consensus protocol using proof of work and a difficulty adjustment function, in which participants compete to solve cryptographic hash puzzles,
and probabilistically earn the right to commit blocks and earn associated rewards in proportion to their invested computational effort.
Motivated in part by the high energy cost of this approach, subsequent permissionless consensus protocols have proposed or adopted other alternative participation rules for Sybil attack protection,
such as proof of stake, proof of space, and proof of authority.

## Paxos Basic

Paxos is a family of distributed algorithms used to reach consensus.

Assume a collection of processes that can propose values.
A consensus algorithm ensures that a single one among the proposed values is chosen.
If no value is proposed, then no value should be chosen.
If a value has been chosen, then processes should be able to learn the chosen value.

The safety requirements for consensus are:

- Only a value that has been proposed may be chosen,
- Only a single value is chosen, and
- A process never learns that a value has been chosen unless it actually has been.

Paxos defines three roles: *proposers*, *acceptors*, and *learners*.
Paxos nodes can take multiple roles, even all of them.

Paxos nodes must know how many acceptors a majority is.

Paxos nodes must be persistent: they can't forget what they accepted.

A Paxos run aims at reaching a single consensus.
Once a consensus is reached, it cannot progress to another consensus.

Assume that agents can communicate with one another by sending messages. We use the customary asynchronous, non-Byzantine model, in which:

- Agents operate at arbitrary speed, may fail by stopping, and may restart.
  Since all agents may fail after a value is chosen and then restart, a solution is impossible unless some information can be remembered by an agent that has failed and restarted.
- Messages can take arbitrarily long to be delivered, can be duplicated, and can be lost, but they are not corrupted.

This leads to the following algorithm for issuing proposals.

1. A proposer chooses a new proposal number n and sends a request to each member of some set of acceptors, asking it to respond with:
   1. A promise never again to accept a proposal numbered less than n, and
   2. The proposal with the highest number less than n that it has accepted, if any.
      I will call such a request a prepare request with number n.
2. If the proposer receives the requested responses from a majority of the acceptors, then it can issue a proposal with number n and value v,
   where v is the value of the highest-numbered proposal among the responses,
   or is any value selected by the proposer if the responders reported no proposals.

An acceptor can accept a proposal numbered n iff it has not responded
to a prepare request having a number greater than n.

we see that
the algorithm operates in the following two phases.
Phase 1. (a) A proposer selects a proposal number n and sends a prepare
request with number n to a majority of acceptors.
(b) If an acceptor receives a prepare request with number n greater
than that of any prepare request to which it has already responded,
then it responds to the request with a promise not to accept any more
proposals numbered less than n and with the highest-numbered proposal (if any) that it has accepted.

Phase 2. (a) If the proposer receives a response to its prepare requests
(numbered n) from a majority of acceptors, then it sends an accept
request to each of those acceptors for a proposal numbered n with a
value v, where v is the value of the highest-numbered proposal among
the responses, or is any value if the responses reported no proposals.
(b) If an acceptor receives an accept request for a proposal numbered
n, it accepts the proposal unless it has already responded to a prepare
request having a number greater than n.

[Revisiting the Paxos algorithm](http://citeseer.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download;jsessionid=C6EF80E450719CD5457C0E85CCDD0999?doi=10.1.1.44.5607&rep=rep1&type=pdf)

[Fast Paxos](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/tr-2005-112.pdf)

[Cheap Paxos](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/web-dsn-submission.pdf)

[How to Build a Highly Available System Using Consensus](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/uploads/prod/1996/10/Acrobat-58-Copy.pdf)

[Consensus on Transaction Commit](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/uploads/prod/2004/01/twophase-revised.pdf)

[Brewer’s conjecture and the feasibility of consistent, available, partition-tolerant web services](https://users.ece.cmu.edu/~adrian/731-sp04/readings/GL-cap.pdf)

## References

1. [The Part-Time Parliament](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/uploads/prod/2016/12/The-Part-Time-Parliament.pdf)
2. [Paxos Made Simple](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/uploads/prod/2016/12/paxos-simple-Copy.pdf)
3. [Paxos Made Live - An Engineering Perspective](https://www.cs.albany.edu/~jhh/courses/readings/chandra.podc07.paxos.pdf)
4. [The Paxos Algorithm](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d7nAGI_NZPk&ab_channel=GoogleTechTalks)